.TH MD-TO-PDF 1 "June 2026" "pandoc-wrapper 1.0.10" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
md-to-pdf \- convert Markdown to a branded PDF via Pandoc and XeLaTeX
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B md-to-pdf
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.IR "markdown-file(s) | directory | URL"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B md-to-pdf
turns Markdown with YAML front matter into a styled, branded PDF. It merges a
brand configuration with the document, runs Pandoc with a Lua filter (special
boxes, styled datatables, charts) and an Eisvogel-based LaTeX template, and
produces a PDF with XeLaTeX.
.PP
Multiple input files are concatenated in order; a directory is searched for
.I .md
and
.I .yaml
files; an http(s) URL is downloaded first.
.SH FORMATS
A document selects its output format with the
.B template:
field in its front matter; a brand provides the default. All formats share
the brand system (colours, fonts, identity).
.TP
.B report
The default (\fBeisvogel-wrapper\fR, or the minimal \fBmvp\fR): title page, table
of contents and styled body \- reports, briefings and policy documents. Front
matter is numbered in roman, the body restarts at arabic 1. An optional
.B backpage
adds a full-page back cover. With
.B "classoption: twoside"
the output is duplex-aware: even page count, the back cover on a verso, and
.B :::marginbox
notes on the outer edge.
.TP
.B featured
.RB "(" "template: featured" ")."
A report with a designed graphical cover: a brand-coloured band, logo,
title/subtitle, a metadata block
.RB "(" fao ", " date ", author, " docver ")," a
.B "Document overview"
panel
.RB "(" overview ", a list), an optional " classification " chip, an optional"
.B cover-image
(its own natural shape, placed under the title) \- then a section-based body
with brand-coloured headings and a page X-of-Y footer. Cover colours come from
the brand
.RB "(" cover-color ", " cover-text-color ", " cover-accent " override);"
.B watermark
adds diagonal text to the content pages and
.B page-background
lays a full-page image behind every page.
.TP
.B letter
.RB "(" "template: letter" ")."
No title page; the recipient address
.RB "(" to: ", a list of lines)"
is positioned for a DL window envelope
.RB "(" "window-position: left" "|" right ")"
with the date and optional
.BR our-ref / your-ref
on the opposite side, an optional bold
.B subject
and optional
.BR opening / closing / signature .
A scanned signature image (or several, side by side) may be supplied with
.BR signature-image .
A letterhead is either a full-page
.B letterhead:
artwork, or built from
.BR letterhead-logo ", " letterhead-company " and " letterhead-contact
(a ruled logo-and-contact footer). An optional statutory line adds
.BR letterhead-tel ", " letterhead-reg-number " and " letterhead-vat ;
.B letterhead-rule-image
replaces the plain footer rule with a graphic.
.TP
.B slides (beamer)
.RB "(" "template: beamer" ")."
A beamer slide deck. Standard beamer
.BR theme ", " colortheme " and " fonttheme
are honoured, and the brand palette is wired into the beamer colours via the
brand's
.BR beamer-structure / beamer-accent .
Selecting it switches the output to Pandoc's beamer writer.
.TP
.B slides (modern)
.RB "(" "template: slides" ")."
A flat, full-bleed slide deck rendered in pure XeLaTeX (not beamer): solid
brand-colour grounds, bold type, and auto-boxed images. A level-1 heading is a
section/divider slide, a level-2 heading a content slide; the per-slide colour
role is set with an
.RB "{." light / dark / accent "}"
heading attribute. Grounds default from the brand's
.BR beamer-structure / beamer-accent
and are overridable per deck with
.BR slide-title-bg / slide-accent .
.PP
The fields each format understands are listed under
.B FRONTMATTER FIELDS
below (or run
.BR "md-to-pdf \-\-fields" );
worked examples are in the authoring guide (see
.BR FILES ).
.SH FRONTMATTER FIELDS
The fields below are the ones
.B md-to-pdf
adds on top of Pandoc. Standard Pandoc and Eisvogel metadata
.RB ( title ", " author ", " date ", " abstract ", " toc ", " geometry ", "
.BR fontfamily ", " classoption ,
the beamer
.BR theme / colortheme / aspectratio ", ...)"
also apply \- see
.BR pandoc (1)
and the Eisvogel template documentation. A field whose value names a colour
takes a
.B brand\-colours
name; a field whose value is an image takes a bare filename (resolved in the
brand folder) or an absolute path.
.SS Core (any document)
.TP
.B brand:
Brand to merge into the document (default
.BR plain ).
Document fields override the brand's.
.TP
.B template:
Output format:
.B eisvogel\-wrapper
(default),
.BR mvp ", " featured ", " letter ", " beamer " or " slides .
.SS Brand colours
.TP
.B brand\-colours:
A map of
.IR name " -> " "hex colour" ;
each entry becomes a colour usable by name elsewhere.
.TP
.B beamer\-structure:
Brand\-colour name driving the primary / ground colour (beamer and modern
slides; also the default for featured/report accents).
.TP
.B beamer\-accent:
Brand\-colour name driving the accent colour.
.SS Report (template: eisvogel\-wrapper | mvp)
.TP
.B titlepage:
.B true
to render the title page.
.TP
.BR titlepage\-color: ", " titlepage\-text\-color: ", " titlepage\-rule\-color:
Title\-page background, text and rule colours (hex).
.TP
.B titlepage\-rule\-height:
Title\-page rule thickness (pt).
.TP
.BR titlepage\-logo: ", " logo\-width:
Title\-page logo image and its width (e.g.\&
.BR 35mm ).
.TP
.B titlepage\-background:
Full\-page title\-page background image.
.TP
.B toc\-own\-page:
Put the table of contents on its own page.
.TP
.B book:
.B true
for chaptered
.RB ( scrbook )
output.
.TP
.B "classoption: twoside"
Duplex\-aware output: even page count, back cover on a verso, and
.B :::marginbox
notes on the outer edge.
.TP
.B backpage:
.B true
to render a full\-page back cover.
.TP
.BR backpage\-color: ", " backpage\-text\-color:
Back\-cover background (defaults to
.BR titlepage\-color )
and text colour (hex).
.TP
.BR backpage\-logo: ", " backpage\-text: ", " backpage\-publisher: ", " backpage\-website:
Back\-cover logo image, body text, publisher line and website line.
.TP
.BR page\-background: ", " page\-background\-opacity:
Full\-page image behind every page, and its opacity (default
.BR 0.2 ).
.TP
.B watermark:
Diagonal watermark text on the content pages.
.SS Featured (template: featured)
A report with a designed graphical cover.
.TP
.B cover\-image:
Image placed under the title at its natural shape.
.TP
.BR cover\-color: ", " cover\-text\-color: ", " cover\-accent:
Cover band colour (defaults to
.BR titlepage\-color ),
text colour (hex) and accent colour (brand\-colour name).
.TP
.B cover\-footer:
Cover footer line text.
.TP
.B classification:
Classification chip on the cover and a running header (e.g.\&
.BR CONFIDENTIAL ).
.TP
.BR clientname: ", " fao: ", " docver:
Client/recipient line, "for the attention of" line and document version line
on the cover.
.TP
.B overview:
A list rendered as the
.B Document overview
panel.
.TP
.BR page\-background: ", " watermark:
As for the report format.
.SS Letter (template: letter)
.TP
.B to:
List of recipient address lines (positioned for a window envelope).
.TP
.B from:
Sender address lines.
.TP
.B window\-position:
.B left
or
.B right
\- which envelope window the recipient block suits.
.TP
.B subject:
Bold subject line.
.TP
.BR opening: ", " closing:
Salutation and sign\-off.
.TP
.B signature:
Typed signature name.
.TP
.BR signature\-image: ", " signature\-height: ", " signature\-title:
Scanned signature image(s) \- one value or a list \- their height (default
.BR 18mm ),
and a line beneath (role/title).
.TP
.BR our\-ref: ", " your\-ref:
Reference lines in the right\-hand column.
.TP
.B letterhead:
Full\-page letterhead artwork image (overrides the built\-in letterhead).
.TP
.BR letterhead\-logo: ", " letterhead\-logo\-height: ", " letterhead\-company: ", " letterhead\-contact:
Built\-in letterhead: logo image, its height (default
.BR 16mm ),
company name and contact block.
.TP
.BR letterhead\-tel: ", " letterhead\-reg\-number: ", " letterhead\-vat:
Statutory footer line: telephone, company registration number and VAT number.
.TP
.BR letterhead\-rule\-image: ", " letterhead\-rule\-colour: ", " letterhead\-text\-colour:
A graphic replacing the plain footer rule, the rule colour (when no image), and
the footer text colour.
.TP
.BR letter\-top: ", " letter\-bottom: ", " letter\-margin: ", " address\-top: ", " letterhead\-logo\-top: ", " letterhead\-footer\-bottom:
Layout fine\-tuning lengths (e.g.\&
.BR 25mm ).
.SS Slides \- beamer (template: beamer)
.TP
.BR beamer\-structure: ", " beamer\-accent:
Brand\-colour names mapped onto the beamer structure and accent colours.
Standard beamer
.BR theme / colortheme / fonttheme / aspectratio
also apply and take precedence.
.SS Slides \- modern (template: slides)
.TP
.BR slide\-title\-bg: ", " slide\-accent:
Title/section\-slide ground and accent colours (brand\-colour names). Set a
per\-slide role with a heading attribute:
.BR {.light} ", " {.dark} ", " {.accent} .
.PP
Body features \-
.B :::
box fences, datatables and charts \- are written in the Markdown body, not the
front matter; see the authoring guide.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-order\-alpha
Sort multiple input files alphabetically before concatenating.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Print verbose debug output.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-viewer
Do not open the PDF viewer after a successful build.
.TP
.B \-\-fields
List the front\-matter fields this tool adds (a quick reference grouped by
format) and exit. See
.B FRONTMATTER FIELDS
below for the same list with descriptions.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a help summary (including the resolved paths) and exit.
.SH BRANDS
A document selects a brand in its front matter:
.PP
.RS
.B brand:
.I name
.RE
.PP
.B plain
is the default brand and ships with the tool. Your own brands live in an
external base folder, one subfolder per brand:
.PP
.RS
.IR <base> / <name> /template.yaml
.RE
.PP
together with that brand's assets (for example
.IR logo.png ,
.IR cover.pdf ).
Assets are referenced by
.B bare filename
in
.IR template.yaml ;
the build adds the brand folder to Pandoc's
.B \-\-resource\-path
and to
.B TEXINPUTS
so they resolve. A brand is therefore self\-contained and portable \- it can
live in its own repository or package.
.PP
The brands base is resolved in this order:
.IP 1. 3
the
.B MD_TO_PDF_BRANDS
environment variable;
.IP 2. 3
the
.B brands_dir
setting in the configuration file (see below);
.IP 3. 3
the bundled default brand
.RB ( plain ),
which is always available as a fallback.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is read from
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/pandoc-wrapper/config
(by default
.IR ~/.config/pandoc-wrapper/config ),
or from the path in
.BR MD_TO_PDF_CONFIG .
It uses simple
.I key = value
lines. The key that matters is the brands base:
.PP
.RS
.B brands_dir =
.I /path/to/your/brands
.RE
.PP
A leading
.B ~
is expanded to your home directory. When no brands base is configured,
.B md-to-pdf
uses the bundled
.B plain
brand and prints a one\-line hint on each run.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/pandoc-wrapper/config
Per\-user configuration (\fBbrands_dir\fR).
.TP
.I /usr/share/pandoc-wrapper/templates/
LaTeX templates, the shared preamble and the Lua filter.
.TP
.I /usr/share/pandoc-wrapper/brands/plain/
The bundled default brand.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MD_TO_PDF_BRANDS
Override the brands base folder.
.TP
.B MD_TO_PDF_TEMPLATES
Override the templates folder.
.TP
.B MD_TO_PDF_CONFIG
Override the configuration file path.
.TP
.B MD_TO_PDF_VIEWER
PDF viewer to open on success (default
.IR /usr/bin/evince ).
.SH EXAMPLES
Build a document with the default brand:
.PP
.RS
.B md-to-pdf report.md
.RE
.PP
Configure your own brands once, then use them:
.PP
.RS
.B mkdir -p ~/.config/pandoc-wrapper
.br
.B echo 'brands_dir = ~/pandoc-brands' > ~/.config/pandoc-wrapper/config
.br
.B md-to-pdf --no-viewer report.md
.RE
.PP
Create a new brand by copying the default:
.PP
.RS
.B cp -r /usr/share/pandoc-wrapper/brands/plain ~/pandoc-brands/acme
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pandoc (1),
.BR xelatex (1).
Full authoring and template documentation is installed under
.IR /usr/share/doc/pandoc-wrapper/ .
.SH AUTHOR
Stuart J Mackintosh <sjm@opendigital.cc>
